---
layout: assignment-two-column
title: Make a Recommendation App
abbreviation: P2
type: project
due_date: 2023-03-16
ordering: 2
points: 40
canvas_id: 1174711
draft: 0
---

> **Note**: PLEASE read through the instructions in full before starting. It'll only take 5 minutes and it'll make things much more clear.

## Project Overview
For the second project, we want you to apply all that you've learned this quarter to build a program that searches, filters, and displays data. Because much of what programmers do involves manipulating and making sense of data for many different purposes, this will likely be a skill that many of you will leverage in the future if you do any kind of data analytics or science.

This project is all about using pre-existing API Functions (just like we had a library of existing function for project 1) to interact with real-time service data from Spotify and Yelp. Though you won't have to get into the weeds of exactly how APIs work, you'll need to understand the different functions as your disposal (think of them as building blocks) and how you can connect them together to produce a working program!

### Your tasks are as follows:
1. Pick one of two themes: music (Spotify) or food (Yelp)
1. Get oriented with the relevant helper modules <a href="/course-files/projects/project02/docs/apis/yelp.html" target="_blank">apis.yelp</a>, <a href="/course-files/projects/project02/docs/apis/spotify.html" target="_blank">apis.spotify</a>, <a href="/course-files/projects/project02/docs/apis/twilio.html" target="_blank">apis.twilio</a>, which will help you interact with the service providers (Yelp, Spotify, and Twilio)
1. Fulfill the requirements of the assignment (described below)
1. Earn up to 5 points extra credit by completing ***optional*** enhancements
1. Other logistics:
    * _You are welcome to collaborate in groups of 2 or 3_. You are not allowed to work in groups of larger than 3.
    * <mark>You must signup for a "Team" on Canvas if you're working in a group. Go to the People tab of our Canvas page, click on the P2 Teams, and with your group, sign up for any one of the 200 available groups.</mark>
    * Please complete the setup AS SOON AS POSSIBLE (see below; it takes no time at all).
    * Please start on this assignment **early**: like with anything, you’ll get out of it what you put into it.

* * *

## Setup: Please Read Carefully
You will need to install some dependencies and edit some files before you begin this project:

### A. Download the starter files

The "Project Starter Files" button is at the very bottom of the page. PLEASE READ THROUGH THE WHOLE ASSIGNMENT ONCE BEFORE DOWNLOADING THE FILES.

`pip` is a program that allows us to install external libraries, made by people around the world, for use in our own program. Normally, `pip` is a _command-line tool_ where you interact with it using the Terminal (on a Mac) or Command Prompt (on a PC). In fact, I'll be demoing this in class on Monday in Week 10.

In order to complete P2, you'll need to install two external Python packages and upgrade an existing one. If you'd like to try to use the command prompt, [visit this `pip` page](/resources/pip). 

Otherwise, inside the starter files, open the `install_python_packages.py` file and then run it. You'll be presented with 6 options, each with a number associated with them. To install `sendgrid` (which is made by a copmany called Twilio) and `requests`, you'll first enter option `0`, then when the program asks which package you want to install, you'll enter the name of the package you want to install. It'll install it and then go back to the menu. Then pick `0` again and install the second module. Finally, you'll enter option `1` to upgrade `certifi`. DO NOT HALT THE EXECUTION OF THIS PROGRAM. **Instead, to exit, select option 5 at the menu.**

If you run into any issues on this part, you'll need to post on Campuswire or come to OH. If the program prints out any errors (it won't necessarily be in red text so make sure to read what it outputs), feel free to copy and paste it into your post so we can diagnose the issue.

### B. Get the API access token
Download the [my_token.py](https://canvas.northwestern.edu/files/15981376/download?download_frd=1) file from Canvas and save it inside of the `apis` folder (included in the project starter code). If this link doesn't work, just go to our Canvas page, click on the Files tab, and download the file called `my_token.py`. **Make sure to move it into the `apis` folder!**
### C. Run the verification script
Inside the `tests` folder, open the `run_verification.py` file and run it.

> **Note**: <mark>If you downloaded the template files (ZIP) and `my_token.py` PRIOR to 5pm on Friday (March 3), you'll need to redownload those files and move your work to the new folder</mark>. You should only have to move `restaurant_finder.py` or `music_finder.py` since those are the only files you'll be modifying. If you haven't started working in those files, then there's no cause for concern! Just start fresh. <a href="https://campuswire.com/c/GB09BA912/feed/639" target="_blank">More details on Campuswire</a>.

If you get a message that looks like this (after entering your email addresss):

```bash
test_token (tests.test_authentication.TestAuthentication.test_token) ... ok
test_get_key (tests.test_authentication.TestAuthentication.test_get_key) ... ok
test__issue_get_request_only_one (tests.test_spotify.TestSpotify.test__issue_get_request_only_one) ... 
Loading: https://api.spotify.com/v1/search?q=beyonce&type=track
ok
test_execute_business_queries_just_one_simplified (tests.test_yelp.TestYelp.test_execute_business_queries_just_one_simplified) ... DEBUG: https://api.yelp.com/v3/businesses/search?location=Tallahassee, FL&limit=10
ok
test_can_import_twilio (tests.test_twilio.TestTwilio.test_can_import_twilio) ... ok
test_can_import_twilio_api_module (tests.test_twilio.TestTwilio.test_can_import_twilio_api_module) ... ok
test_can_send_email (tests.test_twilio.TestTwilio.test_can_send_email) ... Please enter your email address: connor.bain@northwestern.edu
Email sent. You may need to check your spam folder.
ok

----------------------------------------------------------------------
Ran 7 tests in 8.872s

OK
```

...then you're ready to begin the project.

**The most common error** you may get from the above (or when trying to send an email), particularly if you're on a Mac is a security (SSL) error. To fix this, please open your finder and navigate to your `Applications > Python 3.11` folder (or whichever python version you have installed). Then, double-click on the `Install Certificates.command` file. Your email functions should now work!

If you run into some other error, double check you followed the setup instructions, triple check you installed and upgraded the various Python packages, and then come to OH or post on Campuswire with the specific error you're having.

> ### IMPORTANT
> You will be using a number of web data services to complete this assignment, which require the use of API keys (kind of like passwords) that we **pay real money for** and manage. **Please only use these keys for the course assignments.** If you have other app ideas for Twitter, Spotify, Yelp, Twilio, etc., just register for our own keys and use those. They are all free for low-volume transactions. If you mis-use the keys for our course, you risk disabling the ability to do these queries for everyone in the class.

* * *

## Option 1: Yelp!
For option 1, you are going to use the Yelp API to create a restaurant recommendation system. I have created a yelp module for you, located in the apis folder to help you. All of the `apis/yelp.py` functions <a href="/course-files/projects/project02/docs/apis/yelp.html" target="_blank">have been documented here</a>. Here is a video of how your program might work (this is just an example, you might choose to use / implement other features):

<iframe src="https://northwestern.hosted.panopto.com/Panopto/Pages/Embed.aspx?id=7c7e3c44-75ec-43d7-9a48-afb9017a13ec&autoplay=false&offerviewer=true&showtitle=true&showbrand=true&captions=true&interactivity=all" height="405" width="720" style="border: 1px solid #464646;" allowfullscreen allow="autoplay"></iframe>

Note: this is only one way of implementing this program, and includes some extra credit features. Feel free to do it ***your way!***

Please implement the following (5) required features of your restaurant recommendation system (we encourage you to start with the `restaurant_finder.py` template):

### 1. Allow the user to select among the Yelp restaurant categories
You will give the user the option of selecting one or more restaurant categories that can be used to filter the restaurants. To do this you will do the following:

1. Present the user with some subset from the list of available categories (see `yelp.get_categories()` for the complete list).
2. Ask the user to select one or more categories and store their selections in a variable called categories (a comma-separated list of categories).
3. Proved the user with a way to either clear out or update their selected categories.

### 2. Allow the user to set the sorting criteria
How results are ordered really matters in search. Yelp allows 4 different options for sorting results: `best_match`, `rating`, `review_count`, `distance`. Given this, the user should be able to select how they want their results to be filtered.

### 3. Allow user to view restaurants that match the selection criteria
Given the user’s selected categories and sorting criteria:

1. Retrieve the restaurants, and allow the user to specify an additional keyword (a search term to be used with teh `get_businesses` function) before executing the search.
2. Print the retrieved restaurants to the screen in some coherent format.

### 4. Allow the user to preview an individual restaurant
Given the matched restaurants:
1. Allow the user to preview an individual restaurant
2. This should include (a) more detail about the restaurant, and (b) some reviews of the restaurant.
3. Use the `yelp.get_businesses()` and `yelp.get_reviews()` helper functions to help you.

### 5. Allow the user to email a restaurant recommendation
After the user has previewed a restaurant, ask them if they want to email the restaurant recommendation so someone. If so, email them a link to the restaurant and some details about it. Use the `twilio.send_mail` function to help you.

### Extra Credit Options (Up to 5 Points)

#### [2 Points] Allow the user to select a location
You will give the user the option of selecting a location to search (which defaults to Evanston, IL). The user should be able to update this location whenever they want. Once it is set, this location will be used to filter their restaurants (Yelp requires a location).

#### [3 Points] Allow the user to set the price filters
You will give the user the option of selecting one or more price filters. The way the filters work: `1=$`, `2=$$`, `3=$$$`, and `4=$$$$`. So, if I only wanted to see $ and $$, my price filter would be: price_filter=1,2. Given this, the user should be able to select one or more price filters, and clear out their price filters if they want.

#### [2 Points] Allow the user to filter by restaurants that are “open now”
Enhance your program by also giving the user the option of specifying only restaurants which are currently open.

#### [3 Points] Allow the user to filter by restaurants that are “hot and new”
Enhance your program by also giving the user the option of specifying only restaurants which are “hot and new.” See the <a href="https://www.yelp.com/developers/documentation/v3/business_search" target="_blank">Yelp documentation</a> for more info

#### [3 Points] Extra Credit: Generate an HTML file
Generate an HTML file with the table of recommended restaurants as well as some information about each one. Consider embedding images of the restaurants into the file.

#### [5 Points] Incorporate another information source
In addition to searching Yelp, try integrate data from Twitter (or some other source) using some of the lecture samples from Week 9/10. You can earn up to 5 points for each provider that you incorporate.

### Rubric (40 Possible Points)
<table>
    <thead>
        <tr>
            <th>Feature</th>
            <th>Points</th>
            <th>Scoring Guidelines</th>
        </tr>
    </thead>
    <tbody>
        <tr>
            <td>Main Program Loop</td>
            <td>5 points</td>
            <td>
                <ul>
                    <li>Loop handles errors (incorrect inputs). (Note: this applies anywhere you ask the user for input)</li>
                    <li>Loop prompts the user for their input</li>
                    <li>Loop honors user requests</li>
                    <li>Loop does not exit unless user asks to quit</li>
                </ul>
            </td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>Category selection</td>
            <td>8 points</td>
            <td>
                <ul>
                    <li>Displays the user's selected categories(s) if any</li>
                    <li>Displays the available Yelp categories from which to choose</li>
                    <li>Allows user to select among categories</li>
                    <li>Allows user to clear out selected categories and start over</li>
                </ul>
            </td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>Ordering/Sorting Criteria</td>
            <td>4 points</td>
            <td>
                <ul>
                    <li>Allows user to specify their preferred ordering criteria (best_match, rating, review_count, distance).</li>
                </ul>
            </td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>Previewing matching restaurants</td>
            <td>8 points</td>
            <td>
                <ul>
                    <li>Results honor user’s selected location, categories, and sorting criteria</li>
                    <li>Allows the user to specify a search keyword</li>
                    <li>Prints restaurants to the screen in some coherent format.</li>
                </ul>
            </td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>Previewing individual restaurant</td>
            <td>8 points</td>
            <td>
                <ul>
                    <li>Allows user to preview an individual restaurant</li>
                    <li>Includes detail about restaurant</li>
                    <li>Includes restaurant reviews</li>
                </ul>
            </td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>Sends email</td>
            <td>3 points</td>
            <td>
                <ul>
                    <li>Successfully emails a restaurant recommendation and reviews to a user</li>
                </ul>
            </td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>Code Quality</td>
            <td>3 points</td>
            <td>
                <ul>
                    <li>All functions, variables, and file_names have pneumonic names / are snake case
                    (up to -2 points)</li>
                    <li>Code is organized and without unused or redundant code. Please remove commented out code that isn’t running (to help our graders)
                    (up to -3 points)</li>
                </ul>
            </td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>Video</td>
            <td>1 point</td>
            <td>
                <ul>
                    <li>Your video clearly demonstrates the features you implemented.</li>
                </ul>
            </td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>Extra credit</td>
            <td>Up to 5 points</td>
            <td>
                <ul>
                    <li>Students completed various EC options according to the specifications above.</li>
                </ul>
            </td>
        </tr>
    </tbody>
</table>

* * *

## Option 2: Spotity
For option 2, you are going to use the Spotify API to create a music recommendation system. I have created a spotify module for you, located in the apis folder to help you. All of the `apis/spotify.py` functions <a href="/course-files/projects/project02/docs/apis/spotify.html" target="_blank">have been documented here</a>. Here is a demo video of how your program should work:

<iframe src="https://northwestern.hosted.panopto.com/Panopto/Pages/Embed.aspx?id=59fb60cb-bb68-41c9-9fb3-afb9017a1417&autoplay=false&offerviewer=true&showtitle=true&showbrand=true&captions=true&interactivity=all" height="405" width="720" style="border: 1px solid #464646;" allowfullscreen allow="autoplay"></iframe>

Note: this is only one way of implementing this program, and includes some extra credit features. Feel free to do it ***your way!***

Please implement the following (3) required features of your restaurant recommendation system (we encourage you to start with the `music_finder.py` template):

### 1. Allow the user to select one or more genres of music
You will give the user the option of selecting one or more genres that can be used to “seed” the Spotify song recommendations system. To do this you will do the following:
1. Present the user with a list of available genres using the `spotify.get_genres_abridged()` function — feel free to modify it.
2. Ask the user to select one or more genres and store their genre selections in a list variable called “genres”
3. The user should be able to clear out this selection.

### 2. Allow the user to select one or more artists
You will also give the user the option of selecting one or more artists that can also be used to “seed” the Spotify song recommendations system. To do this you will do the following:
1. Provide a way for the user to search for and display artists (use the `spotify.get_artists()` function)
2. Provide a way for the user to select the artists they’re interested in and store the corresponding artist objects in a list variable called “artists”
3. Allow the user to either clear out or append artists to their artists list.

### 3. Generate and email song recommendations
Given the user’s selected genres and artists:
1. Retrieve the recommended tracks using the `spotify.get_similar_tracks()` function.
2. Print the retrieved tracks to the screen in some coherent format.
3. Ask the user if they want to email the tracks to someone, and if so, send an email of the list of track recommendations. Use the `spotify.get_formatted_tracklist_table_html()` function to help you build a nice tracklist (see the video) that can be emailed.

> **NOTE:** The `spotify.get_similar_tracks()` function’s job is to get recommendations based on seed data. As documented, the `get_similar_tracks()` function requires at least one of the following arguments:
> * artist_ids (list): A list of artist ids
> * track_ids (list): A list of track ids [extra credit see below]
> * genres (list): A list of genres
>
> Spotify only allows 5 seed values (in any combination). In other words:
> `len(artist_ids) + len(track_ids) + len(genres)` must be between 1 and 5.

### Extra Credit Options (Up to 5 Points)

#### [3 Points] Allow the user to select one or more tracks
If you have time and need extra credit, you may enhance your program by also giving the user the option of selecting one or more tracks to “seed” the Spotify song recommendations system. To do this, you will do the following:
1. Provide a way for the user to search for and display tracks
1. Provide a way for the user to select the tracks they’re interested in and store the corresponding track objects in a list variable called “tracks”
1. Allow the user to either clear out or append tracks to their tracks list.

#### [2 Points] Extra Credit: Search for similar artists
Allow the user to discover artists who are similar to a given artist.

#### [2 Points] Extra Credit: Search for playlists by keyword
Allow the user to find playlists based on a keyword search.

#### [3 Points] Extra Credit: Generate an HTML file
Generate an HTML file with the table of recommended tracks as well as some information about the artists (and tracks) that went into seeding the playlist. Consider embedding images of artists, albums, and/or audio players into the file.

#### [3 Points] Extra Credit: Save a player to an HTML file
Generate some Player HTML (either for a track, artist, or playlist) and output it to a file (you don't have to know how HTML works to make this happen – the key will be identifying which functions in the api you can use and then remembering how to write to a file!).

#### [5 Points] Extra Credit: Allow the user to download a preview of a song
Allow the user to download an mp3 file of the song preview of at least one of their recommendations.

#### [5 Points] Incorporate another information source
In addition to searching Spotify, try integrate data from YouTube or Twitter as well using some of the lecture samples from Week 9. You can earn up to 5 points for each provider that you incorporate. In other words: 5 points for YouTube, 5 points for Twitter, etc.

### Rubric (40 Possible Points)
<table>
    <thead>
        <tr>
            <th>Feature</th>
            <th>Points</th>
            <th>Scoring Guidelines</th>
        </tr>
    </thead>
    <tbody>
        <tr>
            <td>Main Program Loop</td>
            <td>5 points</td>
            <td><ul>
                <li>Loop handles errors (incorrect inputs) (Note: this applies anywhere you ask the user for input)</li>
                <li>Loop prompts the user for their input</li>
                <li>Loop honors user requests</li>
                <li>Loop does not exit unless user asks to quit</li></ul>
            </td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>Genre Selection</td>
            <td>8 points</td>
            <td>
                <ul>
                    <li>Displays the user's selected genre(s) if any</li>
                    <li>Displays available genres</li>
                    <li>Allows user to select among the genres that are presented (and no others)</li>
                    <li>Allows user to clear out their selected genres and start over</li>
                </ul>
            </td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>Artist Selection</td>
            <td>12 points</td>
            <td>
                <ul>
                    <li>Allows user to search for artist</li>
                    <li>Allows user to select among artists returned from Spotify</li>
                    <li>Allows user to clear out selected artists and start over</li>
                    <li>Displays the names of the user's selected artists</li>
                </ul>
            </td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>Generate and email recommendations</td>
            <td>11 points</td>
            <td><ul>
                <li>Correctly passes arguments of correct type into the get_similar_tracks() function.</li>
                <li>Displays recommendations to screen (including track name and artist name).</li>
                <li>Successfully emails the recommendation list.</li></ul>
            </td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>Code Quality</td>
            <td>3 points</td>
            <td><ul>
                <li>All functions, variables, and file_names have pneumonic names / are snake case
                (up to -2 points)</li>
                <li>Code is organized and without unused or redundant code. Please remove commented out code that isn’t running (to help our graders)
                (up to -3 points)</li></ul>
            </td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>Video</td>
            <td>1 point</td>
            <td>
                <ul>
                    <li>Your video clearly demonstrates the features you implemented.</li>
                </ul>
            </td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>Extra credit</td>
            <td>Up to 5 points</td>
            <td><ul>
                <li>Students completed various EC options according to the specifications above.</li></ul>
            </td>
        </tr>
    </tbody>
</table>

* * *

## What to Turn In
1. The .py file you worked in (i.e. `restaurant_finder.py` or `music_finder.py`)
1. You will **only submit 1 file per team on Canvas** <mark>so it's imperative you're registered for the right team on Canvas.</mark> .
1. Upload an MP4 (NOT a link but an actual file) that demos your system to the VIDEO assignment on Canvas. You can see [Project 1](p1) for more details on how to do that.
1. Please add notes about which extra credit options you choose to pursue this at **the top of your Python file** in a series of comments. If you did the extra credit, PLEASE DO NOT FORGET TO TELL USE WHAT YOU IMPLEMENTED — We want to give you credit for the effort that you put into your program.

* * *

## Template Files
Please note that the official deadline for the project is the day of our final exam block which is Thursday, March 16th. **No late submissions will be accepted. If you don't turn it in by this deadline you will receive a 0 no matter what.**
<br>

<a class="nu-button" href="/course-files/projects/project02_template.zip" target="_blank">
    Project Starter Files <i class="fas fa-download"></i>
</a>

 > **NOTE:** Windows users, make sure to EXTRACT ALL on the downloaded ZIP file before starting to work.

<a class="nu-button" href="/course-files/projects/project02/docs/apis/yelp.html" target="_blank">
    Yelp Docs <i class="fas fa-download"></i>
</a>

<br>

<a class="nu-button" href="/course-files/projects/project02/docs/apis/spotify.html" target="_blank">
    Spotify Docs <i class="fas fa-download"></i>
</a>

<br>

<a class="nu-button" href="/course-files/projects/project02/docs/apis/twilio.html" target="_blank">
    Twilio Docs <i class="fas fa-download"></i>
</a>
